Chapter 6

Temporal-Difference Learning

If one had to identify one idea as central and novel to reinforcement learning, it would
undoubtedly be temporal-di↵erence (TD) learning. TD learning is a combination of
Monte Carlo ideas and dynamic programming (DP) ideas. Like Monte Carlo methods,
TD methods can learn directly from raw experience without a model of the environment’s
dynamics. Like DP, TD methods update estimates based in part on other learned
estimates, without waiting for a final outcome (they bootstrap). The relationship between
TD, DP, and Monte Carlo methods is a recurring theme in the theory of reinforcement
learning; this chapter is the beginning of our exploration of it. Before we are done, we
will see that these ideas and methods blend into each other and can be combined in many
ways. In particular, in Chapter 7 we introduce n-step algorithms, which provide a bridge
from TD to Monte Carlo methods, and in Chapter 12 we introduce the TD( ) algorithm,
which seamlessly unifies them.
    As usual, we start by focusing on the policy evaluation or prediction problem, the
problem of estimating the value function v⇡ for a given policy . For the control problem
(finding an optimal policy), DP, TD, and Monte Carlo methods all use some variation of
generalized policy iteration (GPI). The differences in the methods are primarily differences
in their approaches to the prediction problem.



6.1      TD Prediction
Both TD and Monte Carlo methods use experience to solve the prediction problem. Given
some experience following a policy , both methods update their estimate V of v⇡ for
the nonterminal states St occurring in that experience. Roughly speaking, Monte Carlo
methods wait until the return following the visit is known, then use that return as a
target for V (St ). A simple every-visit Monte Carlo method suitable for nonstationary
environments is
                            P               h
      V (St )   V (St ) +       Gt ⇡ V (St ) ,                                        (6.1)

                                                 119
120                                                  Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


where Gt is the actual return following time t, and is a constant step-size parameter (c.f.,
Equation 2.4). Let us call this method constant- MC. Whereas Monte Carlo methods
must wait until the end of the episode to determine the increment to V (St ) (only then is
Gt known), TD methods need to wait only until the next time step. At time t + 1 they
immediately form a target and make a useful update using the observed reward Rt+1 and
the estimate V (St+1 ). The simplest TD method makes the update
                          P                           h
      V (St )   V (St ) + Rt+1 + "V (St+1 ) ⇡ V (St )                                (6.2)

immediately on transition to St+1 and receiving Rt+1 . In effect, the target for the Monte
Carlo update is Gt , whereas the target for the TD update is Rt+1 + "V (St+1 ). This TD
method is called TD(0), or one-step TD, because it is a special case of the TD( ) and
n-step TD methods developed in Chapter 12 and Chapter 7. The box below specifies
TD(0) completely in procedural form.

   Tabular TD(0) for estimating v⇡

   Input: the policy to be evaluated
   Algorithm parameter: step size ⇤ (0, 1]
   Initialize V (s), for all s ⇤ S+ , arbitrarily except that V (terminal ) = 0
   Loop for each episode:
     Initialize S
     Loop for each step of episode:
        A      action given by for S
        Take action A, observe R, S 0
        V (S)      V (S) + R + "V (S 0 ) ⇡ V (S)
        S     S0
     until S is terminal


   Because TD(0) bases its update in part on an existing estimate, we say that it is a
bootstrapping method, like DP. We know from Chapter 3 that
             .
      v⇡ (s) = E⇡[Gt | St = s]                                                           (6.3)
            = E⇡[Rt+1 + "Gt+1 | St = s]                                           (from (3.9))
            = E⇡[Rt+1 + "v⇡ (St+1 ) | St = s] .                                          (6.4)

Roughly speaking, Monte Carlo methods use an estimate of (6.3) as a target, whereas
DP methods use an estimate of (6.4) as a target. The Monte Carlo target is an estimate
because the expected value in (6.3) is not known; a sample return is used in place of the
real expected return. The DP target is an estimate not because of the expected values,
which are assumed to be completely provided by a model of the environment, but because
v⇡ (St+1 ) is not known and the current estimate, V (St+1 ), is used instead. The TD target
is an estimate for both reasons: it samples the expected values in (6.4) and it uses the
current estimate V instead of the true v⇡ . Thus, TD methods combine the sampling of
6.1. TD Prediction                                                                          121


Monte Carlo with the bootstrapping of DP. As we shall see, with care and imagination
this can take us a long way toward obtaining the advantages of both Monte Carlo and
DP methods.
   Shown to the right is the backup diagram for tabular TD(0). The value
estimate for the state node at the top of the backup diagram is updated on
the basis of the one sample transition from it to the immediately following
state. We refer to TD and Monte Carlo updates as sample updates because
they involve looking ahead to a sample successor state (or state–action pair),
using the value of the successor and the reward along the way to compute a
backed-up value, and then updating the value of the original state (or state– TD(0)
action pair) accordingly. Sample updates differ from the expected updates
of DP methods in that they are based on a single sample successor rather than on a
complete distribution of all possible successors.
   Finally, note that the quantity in brackets in the TD(0) update is a sort of error,
measuring the difference between the estimated value of St and the better estimate
Rt+1 + "V (St+1 ). This quantity, called the TD error, arises in various forms throughout
reinforcement learning:
         .
      ↵t = Rt+1 + "V (St+1 ) ⇡ V (St ).                                                    (6.5)

Notice that the TD error at each time is the error in the estimate made at that time.
Because the TD error depends on the next state and next reward, it is not actually
available until one time step later. That is, ↵t is the error in V (St ), available at time
t + 1. Also note that if the array V does not change during the episode (as it does not in
Monte Carlo methods), then the Monte Carlo error can be written as a sum of TD errors:

      Gt ⇡ V (St ) = Rt+1 + "Gt+1 ⇡ V (St ) + "V (St+1 ) ⇡ "V (St+1 )             (from (3.9))
                           i
                   = ↵t + " Gt+1 ⇡ V (St+1 )
                                     i
                   = ↵t + "↵t+1 + " 2 Gt+2 ⇡ V (St+2 )
                                                                           i
                  = ↵t + "↵t+1 + " 2 ↵t+2 + · · · + " T ⇤t⇤1 ↵T ⇤1 + " T ⇤t GT ⇡ V (ST )
                                                                           i
                  = ↵t + "↵t+1 + " 2 ↵t+2 + · · · + " T ⇤t⇤1 ↵T ⇤1 + " T ⇤t 0 ⇡ 0
                      T
                      ⇥ ⇤1
                  =          " k⇤t ↵k .                                                    (6.6)
                      k=t

This identity is not exact if V is updated during the episode (as it is in TD(0)), but if the
step size is small then it may still hold approximately. Generalizations of this identity
play an important role in the theory and algorithms of temporal-difference learning.
Exercise 6.1 If V changes during the episode, then (6.6) only holds approximately; what
would the difference be between the two sides? Let Vt denote the array of state values
used at time t in the TD error (6.5) and in the TD update (6.2). Redo the derivation
above to determine the additional amount that must be added to the sum of TD errors
in order to equal the Monte Carlo error.                                             ⇤
122                                                        Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


Example 6.1: Driving Home Each day as you drive home from work, you try to
predict how long it will take to get home. When you leave your o↵ce, you note the time,
the day of week, the weather, and anything else that might be relevant. Say on this
Friday you are leaving at exactly 6 o’clock, and you estimate that it will take 30 minutes
to get home. As you reach your car it is 6:05, and you notice it is starting to rain. Tra↵c
is often slower in the rain, so you reestimate that it will take 35 minutes from then, or a
total of 40 minutes. Fifteen minutes later you have completed the highway portion of
your journey in good time. As you exit onto a secondary road you cut your estimate of
total travel time to 35 minutes. Unfortunately, at this point you get stuck behind a slow
truck, and the road is too narrow to pass. You end up having to follow the truck until
you turn onto the side street where you live at 6:40. Three minutes later you are home.
The sequence of states, times, and predictions is thus as follows:
                                       Elapsed Time         Predicted        Predicted
      State                              (minutes)         Time to Go       Total Time
      leaving o↵ce, friday at 6              0                 30               30
      reach car, raining                     5                 35               40
      exiting highway                       20                 15               35
      2ndary road, behind truck             30                 10               40
      entering home street                  40                  3               43
      arrive home                           43                  0               43
The rewards in this example are the elapsed times on each leg of the journey.1 We are
not discounting (" = 1), and thus the return for each state is the actual time to go from
that state. The value of each state is the expected time to go. The second column of
numbers gives the current estimated value for each state encountered.
   A simple way to view the operation of Monte Carlo methods is to plot the predicted
total time (the last column) over the sequence, as in Figure 6.1 (left). The red arrows
show the changes in predictions recommended by the constant- MC method (6.1), for
  = 1. These are exactly the errors between the estimated value (predicted time to go)
in each state and the actual return (actual time to go). For example, when you exited
the highway you thought it would take only 15 minutes more to get home, but in fact it
took 23 minutes. Equation 6.1 applies at this point and determines an increment in the
estimate of time to go after exiting the highway. The error, Gt ⇡ V (St ), at this time is
eight minutes. Suppose the step-size parameter, , is 1/2. Then the predicted time to go
after exiting the highway would be revised upward by four minutes as a result of this
experience. This is probably too large a change in this case; the truck was probably just
an unlucky break. In any event, the change can only be made o⇧ine, that is, after you
have reached home. Only at this point do you know any of the actual returns.
   Is it necessary to wait until the final outcome is known before learning can begin?
Suppose on another day you again estimate when leaving your o↵ce that it will take 30
minutes to drive home, but then you become stuck in a massive tra↵c jam. Twenty-five
minutes after leaving the o↵ce you are still bumper-to-bumper on the highway. You now
   1 If this were a control problem with the objective of minimizing travel time, then we would of course

make the rewards the negative of the elapsed time. But because we are concerned here only with
prediction (policy evaluation), we can keep things simple by using positive numbers.
  6.1. TD Prediction                                                                                           123


           45                                                45
                      actual outcome                                                                       actual
                                                                                                          outcome
           40                                                40
Predicted                                     Predicted
   total                                         total
  travel  35                                    travel  35
   time                                          time

           30                                                30

                leaving reach exiting 2ndary home   arrive        leaving reach exiting 2ndary home   arrive
                 office  car highway road street    home           office  car highway road street    home

                             Situation                                          Situation

  Figure 6.1: Changes recommended in the driving home example by Monte Carlo methods (left)
  and TD methods (right).




  estimate that it will take another 25 minutes to get home, for a total of 50 minutes. As
  you wait in tra↵c, you already know that your initial estimate of 30 minutes was too
  optimistic. Must you wait until you get home before increasing your estimate for the
  initial state? According to the Monte Carlo approach you must, because you don’t yet
  know the true return.
     According to a TD approach, on the other hand, you would learn immediately, shifting
  your initial estimate from 30 minutes toward 50. In fact, each estimate would be shifted
  toward the estimate that immediately follows it. Returning to our first day of driving,
  Figure 6.1 (right) shows the changes in the predictions recommended by the TD rule
  (6.2) (these are the changes made by the rule if = 1). Each error is proportional to the
  change over time of the prediction, that is, to the temporal di↵erences in predictions.
     Besides giving you something to do while waiting in tra↵c, there are several computa-
  tional reasons why it is advantageous to learn based on your current predictions rather
  than waiting until termination when you know the actual return. We briefly discuss some
  of these in the next section.

  Exercise 6.2 This is an exercise to help develop your intuition about why TD methods
  are often more e↵cient than Monte Carlo methods. Consider the driving home example
  and how it is addressed by TD and Monte Carlo methods. Can you imagine a scenario
  in which a TD update would be better on average than a Monte Carlo update? Give
  an example scenario—a description of past experience and a current state—in which
  you would expect the TD update to be better. Here’s a hint: Suppose you have lots of
  experience driving home from work. Then you move to a new building and a new parking
  lot (but you still enter the highway at the same place). Now you are starting to learn
  predictions for the new building. Can you see why TD updates are likely to be much
  better, at least initially, in this case? Might the same sort of thing happen in the original
  scenario?                                                                                  ⇤
124                                                Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


6.2     Advantages of TD Prediction Methods
TD methods update their estimates based in part on other estimates. They learn a
guess from a guess—they bootstrap. Is this a good thing to do? What advantages do
TD methods have over Monte Carlo and DP methods? Developing and answering such
questions will take the rest of this book and more. In this section we briefly anticipate
some of the answers.
   Obviously, TD methods have an advantage over DP methods in that they do not
require a model of the environment, of its reward and next-state probability distributions.
   The next most obvious advantage of TD methods over Monte Carlo methods is that
they are naturally implemented in an online, fully incremental fashion. With Monte
Carlo methods one must wait until the end of an episode, because only then is the return
known, whereas with TD methods one need wait only one time step. Surprisingly often
this turns out to be a critical consideration. Some applications have very long episodes, so
that delaying all learning until the end of the episode is too slow. Other applications are
continuing tasks and have no episodes at all. Finally, as we noted in the previous chapter,
some Monte Carlo methods must ignore or discount episodes on which experimental
actions are taken, which can greatly slow learning. TD methods are much less susceptible
to these problems because they learn from each transition regardless of what subsequent
actions are taken.
   But are TD methods sound? Certainly it is convenient to learn one guess from the
next, without waiting for an actual outcome, but can we still guarantee convergence
to the correct answer? Happily, the answer is yes. For any fixed policy , TD(0) has
been proved to converge to v⇡ , in the mean for a constant step-size parameter if it is
su↵ciently small, and with probability 1 if the step-size parameter decreases according to
the usual stochastic approximation conditions (2.7). Most convergence proofs apply only
to the table-based case of the algorithm presented above (6.2), but some also apply to
the case of general linear function approximation. These results are discussed in a more
general setting in Chapter 9.
   If both TD and Monte Carlo methods converge asymptotically to the correct predictions,
then a natural next question is “Which gets there first?” In other words, which method
learns faster? Which makes the more e↵cient use of limited data? At the current time
this is an open question in the sense that no one has been able to prove mathematically
that one method converges faster than the other. In fact, it is not even clear what is the
most appropriate formal way to phrase this question! In practice, however, TD methods
have usually been found to converge faster than constant- MC methods on stochastic
tasks, as illustrated in Example 6.2.
       6.2. Advantages of TD Prediction Methods                                                                                                      125


            Example 6.2               Random Walk

            In this example we empirically compare the prediction abilities of TD(0) and
            constant- MC when applied to the following Markov reward process:
                                  0           0                      0            0                    0                  1
                                       A                B                 C                  D                 E
                                                                         start
            A Markov reward process, or MRP, is a Markov decision process without actions.
            We will often use MRPs when focusing on the prediction problem, in which there is
            no need to distinguish the dynamics due to the environment from those due to the
            agent. In this MRP, all episodes start in the center state, C, then proceed either left
            or right by one state on each step, with equal probability. Episodes terminate either
            on the extreme left or the extreme right. When an episode terminates on the right,
            a reward of +1 occurs; all other rewards are zero. For example, a typical episode
            might consist of the following state-and-reward sequence: C, 0, B, 0, C, 0, D, 0, E, 1.
            Because this task is undiscounted, the true value of each state is the probability of
            terminating on the right if starting from that state. Thus, the true value of the
            center state is v⇡ (C) = 0.5. The true values of all the states, A through E, are
            1 2 3 4             5
            6 , 6 , 6 , 6 , and 6 .



             0.8           Estimated                                             0.25                       Empirical RMS error,
                             value            100                                                           averaged over states
                                                            10                    0.2               α=.01
             0.6

                   0                                                                                                MC
Estimated          1                                   RMS error,                0.15
                                                                                                            α=.02
  value      0.4
                                                       averaged                                                           α=.04
                                                  True                            0.1
                                                       over states
                                               values                                       α=.15                                               α=.03
             0.2
                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                                 TD           α=.1
                                                                                                                                       α=.05
               0                                                                   0
                       A      B         C           D            E                      0             25             50           75           100
                                      State                                                                 Walks / Episodes

            The left graph above shows the values learned after various numbers of episodes
            on a single run of TD(0). The estimates after 100 episodes are about as close as
            they ever come to the true values—with a constant step-size parameter ( = 0.1
            in this example), the values fluctuate indefinitely in response to the outcomes
            of the most recent episodes. The right graph shows learning curves for the two
            methods for various values of . The performance measure shown is the root
            mean-squared (RMS) error between the value function learned and the true value
            function, averaged over the five states, then averaged over 100 runs. In all cases the
            approximate value function was initialized to the intermediate value V (s) = 0.5, for
            all s. The TD method was consistently better than the MC method on this task.
126                                                    Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


Exercise 6.3 From the results shown in the left graph of the random walk example it
appears that the first episode results in a change in only V (A). What does this tell you
about what happened on the first episode? Why was only the estimate for this one state
changed? By exactly how much was it changed?                                            ⇤
Exercise 6.4 The specific results shown in the right graph of the random walk example
are dependent on the value of the step-size parameter, . Do you think the conclusions
about which algorithm is better would be affected if a wider range of values were used?
Is there a different, fixed value of at which either algorithm would have performed
significantly better than shown? Why or why not?                                     ⇤
⇤
 Exercise 6.5 In the right graph of the random walk example, the RMS error of the
TD method seems to go down and then up again, particularly at high ’s. What could
have caused this? Do you think this always occurs, or might it be a function of how the
approximate value function was initialized?                                          ⇤
Exercise 6.6 In Example 6.2 we stated that the true values for the random walk example
are 16 , 26 , 36 , 46 , and 56 , for states A through E. Describe at least two different ways that
these could have been computed. Which would you guess we actually used? Why? ⇤


6.3      Optimality of TD(0)
Suppose there is available only a finite amount of experience, say 10 episodes or 100
time steps. In this case, a common approach with incremental learning methods is to
present the experience repeatedly until the method converges upon an answer. Given an
approximate value function, V , the increments specified by (6.1) or (6.2) are computed
for every time step t at which a nonterminal state is visited, but the value function is
changed only once, by the sum of all the increments. Then all the available experience is
processed again with the new value function to produce a new overall increment, and so
on, until the value function converges. We call this batch updating because updates are
made only after processing each complete batch of training data.
   Under batch updating, TD(0) converges deterministically to a single answer independent
of the step-size parameter, , as long as is chosen to be su↵ciently small. The constant-
   MC method also converges deterministically under the same conditions, but to a
different answer. Understanding these two answers will help us understand the difference
between the two methods. Under normal updating the methods do not move all the way
to their respective batch answers, but in some sense they take steps in these directions.
Before trying to understand the two answers in general, for all possible tasks, we first
look at a few examples.
Example 6.3: Random walk under batch updating Batch-updating versions of
TD(0) and constant- MC were applied as follows to the random walk prediction example
(Example 6.2). After each new episode, all episodes seen so far were treated as a batch.
They were repeatedly presented to the algorithm, either TD(0) or constant- MC, with
  su↵ciently small that the value function converged. The resulting value function was
then compared with v⇡ , and the average root mean-squared error across the five states
(and across 100 independent repetitions of the whole experiment) was plotted to obtain
6.3. Optimality of TD(0)                                                             127


the learning curves shown in Figure 6.2. Note that the batch TD method was consistently
better than the batch Monte Carlo method.
   Under batch training, constant-
MC converges to values, V (s), that               .25
are sample averages of the actual re-                                BATCH TRAINING
turns experienced after visiting each              .2
state s. These are optimal estimates
in the sense that they minimize the RMS error, .15
mean-squared error from the actual averaged
                                      over states . 1                 MC
returns in the training set. In this
sense it is surprising that the batch             .05      TD
TD method was able to perform
better according to the root mean-                 .0
squared error measure shown in the                    0      25       50      75    100
figure to the right. How is it that                             Walks / Episodes
batch TD was able to perform better
than this optimal method? The an- Figure 6.2: Performance of TD(0) and constant-"
swer is that the Monte Carlo method MC under batch training on the random walk task.
is optimal only in a limited way, and
that TD is optimal in a way that is more relevant to predicting returns.
Example 6.4: You are the Predictor Place yourself now in the role of the predictor
of returns for an unknown Markov reward process. Suppose you observe the following
eight episodes:

       A, 0, B, 0                         B, 1
       B, 1                               B, 1
       B, 1                               B, 1
       B, 1                               B, 0

This means that the first episode started in state A, transitioned to B with a reward of
0, and then terminated from B with a reward of 0. The other seven episodes were even
shorter, starting from B and terminating immediately. Given this batch of data, what
would you say are the optimal predictions, the best values for the estimates V (A) and
V (B)? Everyone would probably agree that the optimal value for V (B) is 34 , because six
out of the eight times in state B the process terminated immediately with a return of 1,
and the other two times in B the process terminated immediately with a return of 0.
   But what is the optimal value for the estimate V (A) given this data? Here there are
two reasonable answers. One is to observe that 100% of the
times the process was in state A it traversed immediately to
B (with a reward of 0); and because we have already decided                   r=1
                   3                               3                             75%
that B has value 4 , therefore A must have value 4 as well.          r= 0
One way of viewing this answer is that it is based on first A 100%           B
modeling the Markov process, in this case as shown to the                        r= 0
                                                                              25%
right, and then computing the correct estimates given the
model, which indeed in this case gives V (A) = 34 . This is
128                                                Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


also the answer that batch TD(0) gives.
   The other reasonable answer is simply to observe that we have seen A once and the
return that followed it was 0; we therefore estimate V (A) as 0. This is the answer that
batch Monte Carlo methods give. Notice that it is also the answer that gives minimum
squared error on the training data. In fact, it gives zero error on the data. But still we
expect the first answer to be better. If the process is Markov, we expect that the first
answer will produce lower error on future data, even though the Monte Carlo answer is
better on the existing data.
   Example 6.4 illustrates a general difference between the estimates found by batch
TD(0) and batch Monte Carlo methods. Batch Monte Carlo methods always find the
estimates that minimize mean-squared error on the training set, whereas batch TD(0)
always finds the estimates that would be exactly correct for the maximum-likelihood
model of the Markov process. In general, the maximum-likelihood estimate of a parameter
is the parameter value whose probability of generating the data is greatest. In this case,
the maximum-likelihood estimate is the model of the Markov process formed in the
obvious way from the observed episodes: the estimated transition probability from i to j
is the fraction of observed transitions from i that went to j, and the associated expected
reward is the average of the rewards observed on those transitions. Given this model,
we can compute the estimate of the value function that would be exactly correct if the
model were exactly correct. This is called the certainty-equivalence estimate because it
is equivalent to assuming that the estimate of the underlying process was known with
certainty rather than being approximated. In general, batch TD(0) converges to the
certainty-equivalence estimate.
   This helps explain why TD methods converge more quickly than Monte Carlo methods.
In batch form, TD(0) is faster than Monte Carlo methods because it computes the
true certainty-equivalence estimate. This explains the advantage of TD(0) shown in the
batch results on the random walk task (Figure 6.2). The relationship to the certainty-
equivalence estimate may also explain in part the speed advantage of nonbatch TD(0)
(e.g., Example 6.2, page 125, right graph). Although the nonbatch methods do not achieve
either the certainty-equivalence or the minimum squared-error estimates, they can be
understood as moving roughly in these directions. Nonbatch TD(0) may be faster than
constant- MC because it is moving toward a better estimate, even though it is not
getting all the way there. At the current time nothing more definite can be said about
the relative e↵ciency of online TD and Monte Carlo methods.
   Finally, it is worth noting that although the certainty-equivalence estimate is in some
sense an optimal solution, it is almost never feasible to compute it directly. If n = |S| is
the number of states, then just forming the maximum-likelihood estimate of the process
may require on the order of n2 memory, and computing the corresponding value function
requires on the order of n3 computational steps if done conventionally. In these terms it
is indeed striking that TD methods can approximate the same solution using memory
no more than order n and repeated computations over the training set. On tasks with
large state spaces, TD methods may be the only feasible way of approximating the
certainty-equivalence solution.
⇤
 Exercise 6.7 Design an off-policy version of the TD(0) update that can be used with
6.4. Sarsa: On-policy TD Control                                                         129


arbitrary target policy and covering behavior policy b, using at each step t the importance
sampling ratio t:t (5.3).                                                                ⇤


6.4     Sarsa: On-policy TD Control
We turn now to the use of TD prediction methods for the control problem. As usual, we
follow the pattern of generalized policy iteration (GPI), only this time using TD methods
for the evaluation or prediction part. As with Monte Carlo methods, we face the need to
trade off exploration and exploitation, and again approaches fall into two main classes:
on-policy and off-policy. In this section we present an on-policy TD control method.
   The first step is to learn an action-value function rather than a state-value function.
In particular, for an on-policy method we must estimate q⇡ (s, a) for the current behavior
policy and for all states s and actions a. This can be done using essentially the same TD
method described above for learning v⇡ . Recall that an episode consists of an alternating
sequence of states and state–action pairs:
             ...                  Rt+1              Rt+2          Rt+3             ...
                        St               St+1            St+2          St+3
                             At                 At+1          At+2          At+3
In the previous section we considered transitions from state to state and learned the
values of states. Now we consider transitions from state–action pair to state–action pair,
and learn the values of state–action pairs. Formally these cases are identical: they are
both Markov chains with a reward process. The theorems assuring the convergence of
state values under TD(0) also apply to the corresponding algorithm for action values:
                                 P                                    h
      Q(St , At )  Q(St , At ) + Rt+1 + "Q(St+1 , At+1 ) ⇡ Q(St , At ) .            (6.7)

This update is done after every transition from a nonterminal state St . If
St+1 is terminal, then Q(St+1 , At+1 ) is defined as zero. This rule uses every
element of the quintuple of events, (St , At , Rt+1 , St+1 , At+1 ), that make up a
transition from one state–action pair to the next. This quintuple gives rise to
the name Sarsa for the algorithm. The backup diagram for Sarsa is as shown
to the right.                                                                         Sarsa
   It is straightforward to design an on-policy control algorithm based on the Sarsa
prediction method. As in all on-policy methods, we continually estimate q⇡ for the
behavior policy , and at the same time change toward greediness with respect to q⇡ .
The general form of the Sarsa control algorithm is given in the box on the next page.
   The convergence properties of the Sarsa algorithm depend on the nature of the policy’s
dependence on Q. For example, one could use ⇡-greedy or ⇡-soft policies. Sarsa converges
with probability 1 to an optimal policy and action-value function as long as all state–action
pairs are visited an infinite number of times and the policy converges in the limit to
the greedy policy (which can be arranged, for example, with ⇡-greedy policies by setting
⇡ = 1/t).
Exercise 6.8 Show that an action-value version of (6.6) holds for the action-value form
of the TD error ↵t = Rt+1 + "Q(St+1 , At+1 ) ⇡ Q(St , At ), again assuming that the values
don’t change from step to step.                                                         ⇤
130                                                  Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


   Sarsa (on-policy TD control) for estimating Q / q

   Algorithm parameters: step size ⇤ (0, 1], small ⇡ > 0
   Initialize Q(s, a), for all s ⇤ S+ , a ⇤ A(s), arbitrarily except that Q(terminal , ·) = 0
   Loop for each episode:
     Initialize S
     Choose A from S using policy derived from Q (e.g., ⇡-greedy)
     Loop for each step of episode:
        Take action A, observe R, S 0
        Choose A0 from S 0 using policy derived from Q (e.g., ⇡-greedy)
        Q(S, A)     Q(S, A) + R + "Q(S 0 , A0 ) ⇡ Q(S, A)
                0
        S     S;A     A0 ;
     until S is terminal



Example 6.5: Windy Gridworld Shown inset below is a standard gridworld, with
start and goal states, but with one difference: there is a crosswind running upward
through the middle of the grid. The actions are the standard four—up, down, right,
and left—but in the middle region the resultant next states are shifted upward by a
“wind,” the strength of which varies from column to column. The strength of the wind
is given below each column, in num-
ber of cells shifted upward. For ex-      170
ample, if you are one cell to the         150
right of the goal, then the action                                G
                                                  S
left takes you to the cell just above


                                        Episodes
the goal. This is an undiscounted                                         Actions
                                          100
episodic task, with constant rewards               0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 1 0

of ⇡1 until the goal state is reached.
                                           50
   The graph to the right shows the
results of applying ⇡-greedy Sarsa to
this task, with ⇡ = 0.1,       = 0.5,       0
and the initial values Q(s, a) = 0
                                              0    1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000
for all s, a. The increasing slope of
the graph shows that the goal was                              Time steps
reached more quickly over time. By
8000 time steps, the greedy policy was long since optimal (a trajectory from it is shown
inset); continued ⇡-greedy exploration kept the average episode length at about 17 steps,
two more than the minimum of 15. Note that Monte Carlo methods cannot easily be used
here because termination is not guaranteed for all policies. If a policy was ever found
that caused the agent to stay in the same state, then the next episode would never end.
Online learning methods such as Sarsa do not have this problem because they quickly
learn during the episode that such policies are poor, and switch to something else.
Exercise 6.9: Windy Gridworld with King’s Moves (programming) Re-solve the windy
gridworld assuming eight possible actions, including the diagonal moves, rather than the
6.5. Q-learning: Off-policy TD Control                                                    131


usual four. How much better can you do with the extra actions? Can you do even better
by including a ninth action that causes no movement at all other than that caused by
the wind?                                                                          ⇤
Exercise 6.10: Stochastic Wind (programming) Re-solve the windy gridworld task with
King’s moves, assuming that the effect of the wind, if there is any, is stochastic, sometimes
varying by 1 from the mean values given for each column. That is, a third of the time
you move exactly according to these values, as in the previous exercise, but also a third
of the time you move one cell above that, and another third of the time you move one
cell below that. For example, if you are one cell to the right of the goal and you move
left, then one-third of the time you move one cell above the goal, one-third of the time
you move two cells above the goal, and one-third of the time you move to the goal. ⇤


6.5      Q-learning: Off-policy TD Control
One of the early breakthroughs in reinforcement learning was the development of an
off-policy TD control algorithm known as Q-learning (Watkins, 1989), defined by
                                    P                                         h
      Q(St , At )   Q(St , At ) +       Rt+1 + " max Q(St+1 , a) ⇡ Q(St , At ) .         (6.8)
                                                   a

In this case, the learned action-value function, Q, directly approximates q , the optimal
action-value function, independent of the policy being followed. This dramatically
simplifies the analysis of the algorithm and enabled early convergence proofs. The policy
still has an effect in that it determines which state–action pairs are visited and updated.
However, all that is required for correct convergence is that all pairs continue to be
updated. As we observed in Chapter 5, this is a minimal requirement in the sense that
any method guaranteed to find optimal behavior in the general case must require it.
Under this assumption and a variant of the usual stochastic approximation conditions on
the sequence of step-size parameters, Q has been shown to converge with probability 1 to
q . The Q-learning algorithm is shown below in procedural form.

   Q-learning (o↵-policy TD control) for estimating                   /

   Algorithm parameters: step size ⇤ (0, 1], small ⇡ > 0
   Initialize Q(s, a), for all s ⇤ S+ , a ⇤ A(s), arbitrarily except that Q(terminal , ·) = 0
   Loop for each episode:
     Initialize S
     Loop for each step of episode:
        Choose A from S using policy derived from Q (e.g., ⇡-greedy)
        Take action A, observe R, S 0
        Q(S, A)     Q(S, A) + R + " maxa Q(S 0 , a) ⇡ Q(S, A)
        S     S0
     until S is terminal
132                                                     Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


   What is the backup diagram for Q-learning? The rule (6.8) updates a state–action
pair, so the top node, the root of the update, must be a small, filled action node. The
update is also from action nodes, maximizing over all those actions possible in the next
state. Thus the bottom nodes of the backup diagram should be all these action nodes.
Finally, remember that we indicate taking the maximum of these “next action” nodes
with an arc across them (Figure 3.4-right). Can you guess now what the diagram is? If
so, please do make a guess before turning to the answer in Figure 6.4 on page 134.
Example 6.6: Cli↵ Walking This gridworld example compares Sarsa and Q-learning,
highlighting the difference between on-policy (Sarsa) and off-policy (Q-learning) methods.
Consider the gridworld shown to the
right. This is a standard undis-                                            R = -1
counted, episodic task, with start         SaferRpath
and goal states, and the usual ac-
tions causing movement up, down,
                                       Optimal path
right, and left. Reward is ⇡1 on all                                     R = -1
                                                             S        T h e C l i f f              G
transitions except those into the re- safe Rrpath
                                                =(! !                                                sa
gion marked “The Cliff.” Stepping
into this region incurs a reward of                                       R = -100
                                      optimal path                                                   op
⇡100 and sends the agent instantly
                                                          S          T h e C l i f f             G
back to the start.
   The graph to the right shows the                                              Sarsa
performance of the Sarsa and Q-                                         R = -100
                                                    !Rr%∃= ! ! ∀∀
learning methods with ⇡-greedy ac-
tion selection, ⇡ = 0.1. After an
                                         Sum of ! ∃∀
initial transient, Q-learning learns Reward                                   Sarsa
values for the optimal policy, that     rewards
                                        per      -25                         Q-learning
                                         during
which travels right along the edge epsiode
                                        episode
of the cliff. Unfortunately, this re-               ! #∃
sults in its occasionally falling off  Sum   of  -50
                                      rewards                             Q-learning
the cliff because of the ⇡-greedy ac-
                                       during
tion selection. Sarsa, on the other episode ! ! ∀∀
hand, takes the action selection into            -75 ∀              !∀∀        %∀∀      &∀∀    ∍∀∀    ∃∀∀
                                                                                 Episodes
                                                                                Episodes
account and learns the longer but
safer path through the upper part
                                                -100
of the grid. Although Q-learning ac-                     0        100       200       300   400    500
tually learns the values of the opti-                                         Episodes
mal policy, its online performance
is worse than that of Sarsa, which
learns the roundabout policy. Of course, if ⇡ were gradually reduced, then both methods
would asymptotically converge to the optimal policy.
Exercise 6.11 Why is Q-learning considered an o↵-policy control method?                          ⇤
Exercise 6.12 Suppose action selection is greedy. Is Q-learning then exactly the same
algorithm as Sarsa? Will they make exactly the same action selections and weight
updates?                                                                            ⇤
                       6.6. Expected Sarsa                                                                                                            133


                       6.6        Expected Sarsa
                    Consider the learning algorithm that is just like Q-learning except that instead of the
                    maximum over next state–action pairs it uses the expected value, taking into account
                    how likely each action is under the current policy. That is, consider the algorithm with
                    the update rule
                                                               P                                                               h
                         Q(S    , A   )   Q(S      , A  ) +      R      +  " E   [Q(S      ,
ts on two versions of the windy on the edge of the cliff immediately, resulting in a slightly
                              t     t            t    t            t+1         ⇡       t+1   At+1 ) | S t+1 ] ⇡ Q(S   t , At )
  with a deterministic environment better on-line              P performance.⇥                                               h
                                          Q(St , At ) + Rt+1 + "                     (a|St+1 )Q(St+1 , a) ⇡ Q(St , At ) ,           (6.9)
c environment. We do so in order                 For n = 100, 000, the average return is equal for all
                                                                               a
   of environment stochasticity on ↵ values in case of Expected Sarsa and Q-learning. This
 ce between Expected       Sarsa and
                    but that     otherwiseindicates
                                               follows the  that the  algorithms
                                                                schema of             have converged
                                                                               Q-learning.      Given the long  before
                                                                                                              next  state,theSt+1 , this
                    algorithm      moves   deterministically         in  the  same    direction
 st part of Hypothesis 2. We then end of the run for all ↵ values, since we do not see any        as  Sarsa   moves     in  expectation,
                    and  accordingly     it  is called     Expected    Sarsa.     Its backup   diagram
 nt amounts of policy stochasticity effect of the initial learning phase. For Sarsa the performance        is shown     on  the right in
                    Figure
 of Hypothesis 2. For       6.4.
                       completeness,          comes close to the performance of Expected Sarsa only for
                       Expected
ance of Q-learning on this problem.  Sarsa is↵more
                                                 = 0.1, complex     computationally
                                                            while for                    than Sarsa but,
                                                                        large ↵, the performance       for nin=return,
                                                                                                                 100, 000  it eliminates
ts in other domains theverifying
                         variance the due toeven
                                               the random
                                                      drops belowselection   of At+1 . Given
                                                                        the performance       for the
                                                                                                   n =same
                                                                                                         100. amount
                                                                                                               The reason of experience
                    we  might     expect   it  to   perform     slightly   better    than   Sarsa,
arsa in a broader setting. All results is that for large values of ↵ the Q values of Sarsa diverge. and   indeed   it   generally   does.
                    Figure  6.3   shows   summary         results  on  the  cliff-walking
raged over numerous independent Although the policy is still improved over the initial randomtask  with  Expected     Sarsa     compared
                    to Sarsa and Q-learning. Expected Sarsa retains the significant advantage of Sarsa over
 rd error becomes negligible.                 policy during the early stages of learning, divergence causes
                    Q-learning on this problem. In addition, Expected Sarsa shows a significant improvement
                                              the policy to get worse in the long run.

                                             0                       0
ypothesis 1 using the cliff walking
 sodic navigation task in which the         −20
 rom start to goal in a deterministic
                                                                                                                                Expected Sarsa
ge of the grid world is a cliff (see       -40
                                            −40                              Asymptotic Performance
 ake any of four movement actions:
 ach of which moves theSum agentofone
                                   rewards −60                             Q-learning
                                                                                                                              Sarsa


                                                 average return
                            per episode
ng direction. Each step results   in a
                                           -80
                                            −80                                                                      Q-learning
n the agent steps into the cliff area,
  of -100 and an immediate return         −100
 sode ends upon reaching the goal                                                                          n = 100, Sarsa
                                                                                   Interim Performancen = 100, Q−learning
                                                              -120
                                                               −120                                        n = 100, Expected Sarsa
                                                                                                           n = 1E5, Sarsa
                                                                                                           n = 1E5, Q−learning
                                                                  −140
                                                                                                           n = 1E5, Expected Sarsa


                                                                  −160
                                                                     0.1
                                                                     0.1     0.2
                                                                             0.2      0.3
                                                                                      0.3     0.4
                                                                                              0.4    0.5
                                                                                                     0.5       0.6
                                                                                                               0.6      0.7
                                                                                                                        0.7     0.8
                                                                                                                                0.8   0.9
                                                                                                                                      0.9        11
                                                                                                           ↵
                                                                                                        alpha

                             G
                         Figure    6.3: Interim and asymptotic performance of TD control methods on the cli↵-walking
                                                  Fig. 2. Average return on the cliff walking task over the first n episodes
                         task as a function offor".n =All  100algorithms
                                                                and n = 100,used
                                                                              000 an  ↵-greedy
                                                                                  using         policy
                                                                                         an -greedy      with
                                                                                                    policy with↵ =   0.1.The
                                                                                                                  = 0.1.   Asymptotic
 The agent has to move from      the startis[S]an big
                         performance             average
                                                      dots over  100,000
                                                           indicate the    episodes
                                                                        maximal       whereas interim performance is an average
                                                                                 values.
stepping into the cliff (grey
                         over area).
                              the first 100 episodes. These data are averages of over 50,000 and 10 runs for the interim
                         and asymptotic cases respectively. The solid circles mark the best interim performance of each
rmance over the first    method.     Adapted
                            n episodes            B. van
                                             as from  Windy    Grid
                                                           Seijen     World
                                                                   et al. (2009).
g rate ↵ using an -greedy policy                   We turn to the windy grid world task to further test Hy-
hows the result for n = 100 and                 pothesis 2. The windy grid world task is another navigation
ed the results over 50,000 runs and             task, where the agent has to find its way from start to goal.
                                                The grid has a height of 7 and a width of 10 squares. There
Sarsa outperforms Q-learning and                is a wind blowing in the ’up’ direction in the middle part of
e values, confirming Hypothesis 1               the grid, with a strength of 1 or 2 depending on the column.
 nce for Hypothesis 2. The optimal              Figure 3 shows the grid world with a number below each
134                                               Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning




                     Q-learning                    Expected Sarsa
           Figure 6.4: The backup diagrams for Q-learning and Expected Sarsa.


over Sarsa over a wide range of values for the step-size parameter . In cliff walking
the state transitions are all deterministic and all randomness comes from the policy. In
such cases, Expected Sarsa can safely set = 1 without suffering any degradation of
asymptotic performance, whereas Sarsa can only perform well in the long run at a small
value of , at which short-term performance is poor. In this and other examples there is
a consistent empirical advantage of Expected Sarsa over Sarsa.
   In these cliff walking results Expected Sarsa was used on-policy, but in general it
might use a policy different from the target policy to generate behavior, in which case
it becomes an off-policy algorithm. For example, suppose is the greedy policy while
behavior is more exploratory; then Expected Sarsa is exactly Q-learning. In this sense
Expected Sarsa subsumes and generalizes Q-learning while reliably improving over Sarsa.
Except for the small additional computational cost, Expected Sarsa may completely
dominate both of the other more-well-known TD control algorithms.


6.7     Maximization Bias and Double Learning
All the control algorithms that we have discussed so far involve maximization in the
construction of their target policies. For example, in Q-learning the target policy is
the greedy policy given the current action values, which is defined with a max, and in
Sarsa the policy is often ⇡-greedy, which also involves a maximization operation. In these
algorithms, a maximum over estimated values is used implicitly as an estimate of the
maximum value, which can lead to a significant positive bias. To see why, consider a
single state s where there are many actions a whose true values, q(s, a), are all zero but
whose estimated values, Q(s, a), are uncertain and thus distributed some above and some
below zero. The maximum of the true values is zero, but the maximum of the estimates
is positive, a positive bias. We call this maximization bias.
Example 6.7: Maximization Bias Example The small MDP shown inset in
Figure 6.5 provides a simple example of how maximization bias can harm the performance
of TD control algorithms. The MDP has two non-terminal states A and B. Episodes
always start in A with a choice between two actions, left and right. The right action
transitions immediately to the terminal state with a reward and return of zero. The
left action transitions to B, also with a reward of zero, from which there are many
possible actions all of which cause immediate termination with a reward drawn from a
normal distribution with mean ⇡0.1 and variance 1.0. Thus, the expected return for
any trajectory starting with left is ⇡0.1, and thus taking left in state A is always a
6.7. Maximization Bias and Double Learning                                                    135


                   100%
                                             N( 0.1, 1)
                                                               0          0
                                                 ...      B   left
                                                                     A   right
                   75%


          % left
         actions   50%
                                             Q-learning
         from A
                              Double
                   25%        Q-learning


                    5%                                                            optimal
                     0
                          1                100                200                300
                                                 Episodes
Figure 6.5: Comparison of Q-learning and Double Q-learning on a simple episodic MDP (shown
inset). Q-learning initially learns to take the left action much more often than the right action,
and always takes it significantly more often than the 5% minimum probability enforced by
↵-greedy action selection with ↵ = 0.1. In contrast, Double Q-learning is essentially una↵ected by
maximization bias. These data are averaged over 10,000 runs. The initial action-value estimates
were zero. Any ties in ↵-greedy action selection were broken randomly.



mistake. Nevertheless, our control methods may favor left because of maximization bias
making B appear to have a positive value. Figure 6.5 shows that Q-learning with ⇡-greedy
action selection initially learns to strongly favor the left action on this example. Even at
asymptote, Q-learning takes the left action about 5% more often than is optimal at our
parameter settings (⇡ = 0.1, = 0.1, and " = 1).
   Are there algorithms that avoid maximization bias? To start, consider a bandit case in
which we have noisy estimates of the value of each of many actions, obtained as sample
averages of the rewards received on all the plays with each action. As we discussed above,
there will be a positive maximization bias if we use the maximum of the estimates as
an estimate of the maximum of the true values. One way to view the problem is that
it is due to using the same samples (plays) both to determine the maximizing action
and to estimate its value. Suppose we divided the plays in two sets and used them to
learn two independent estimates, call them Q1 (a) and Q2 (a), each an estimate of the
true value q(a), for all a ⇤ A. We could then use one estimate, say Q1 , to determine
the maximizing action A = argmaxa Q1 (a), and the other, Q2 , to provide the estimate
of its value, Q2 (A ) = Q2 (argmaxa Q1 (a)). This estimate will then be unbiased in the
sense that E[Q2 (A )] = q(A ). We can also repeat the process with the role of the two
estimates reversed to yield a second unbiased estimate Q1 (argmaxa Q2 (a)). This is the
idea of double learning. Note that although we learn two estimates, only one estimate is
updated on each play; double learning doubles the memory requirements, but does not
increase the amount of computation per step.
   The idea of double learning extends naturally to algorithms for full MDPs. For example,
the double learning algorithm analogous to Q-learning, called Double Q-learning, divides
the time steps in two, perhaps by flipping a coin on each step. If the coin comes up heads,
136                                                       Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


the update is
                                 P            i                                          h
Q1 (St , At )   Q1 (St , At )+       Rt+1 +"Q2 St+1 , argmax Q1 (St+1 , a) ⇡Q1 (St , At ) . (6.10)
                                                          a

If the coin comes up tails, then the same update is done with Q1 and Q2 switched,
so that Q2 is updated. The two approximate value functions are treated completely
symmetrically. The behavior policy can use both action-value estimates. For example, an
⇡-greedy policy for Double Q-learning could be based on the average (or sum) of the two
action-value estimates. A complete algorithm for Double Q-learning is given in the box
below. This is the algorithm used to produce the results in Figure 6.5. In that example,
double learning seems to eliminate the harm caused by maximization bias. Of course
there are also double versions of Sarsa and Expected Sarsa.

    Double Q-learning, for estimating Q1 / Q2 / q

    Algorithm parameters: step size ⇤ (0, 1], small ⇡ > 0
    Initialize Q1 (s, a) and Q2 (s, a), for all s ⇤ S+ , a ⇤ A(s), such that Q(terminal , ·) = 0
    Loop for each episode:
      Initialize S
      Loop for each step of episode:
         Choose A from S using the policy ⇡-greedy in Q1 + Q2
         Take action A, observe R, S 0
         With 0.5 probabilility:      ⇤                                              X
                                              i 0                 0
             Q1 (S, A)    Q1 (S, A) + R + "Q2 S , argmaxa Q1 (S , a) ⇡ Q1 (S, A)
         else:                        ⇤                                              X
                                              i
             Q2 (S, A)    Q2 (S, A) + R + "Q1 S 0 , argmaxa Q2 (S 0 , a) ⇡ Q2 (S, A)
         S     S0
      until S is terminal

⇤
 Exercise 6.13 What are the update equations for Double Expected Sarsa with an
⇡-greedy target policy?                                                      ⇤



6.8       Games, Afterstates, and Other Special Cases
In this book we try to present a uniform approach to a wide class of tasks, but of
course there are always exceptional tasks that are better treated in a specialized way. For
example, our general approach involves learning an action-value function, but in Chapter 1
we presented a TD method for learning to play tic-tac-toe that learned something much
more like a state-value function. If we look closely at that example, it becomes apparent
that the function learned there is neither an action-value function nor a state-value
function in the usual sense. A conventional state-value function evaluates states in which
the agent has the option of selecting an action, but the state-value function used in
6.8. Games, Afterstates, and Other Special Cases                                        137


tic-tac-toe evaluates board positions after the agent has made its move. Let us call these
afterstates, and value functions over these, afterstate value functions. Afterstates are
useful when we have knowledge of an initial part of the environment’s dynamics but not
necessarily of the full dynamics. For example, in games we typically know the immediate
effects of our moves. We know for each possible chess move what the resulting position
will be, but not how our opponent will reply. Afterstate value functions are a natural
way to take advantage of this kind of knowledge and thereby produce a more e↵cient
learning method.
   The reason it is more e↵cient to design algorithms in terms of afterstates is apparent
from the tic-tac-toe example. A conventional action-value function would map from
positions and moves to an estimate of the value. But many position–move pairs produce
the same resulting position, as in the example below:

                   X                                                X
                       O    +        X                  O X    +



                                           X
                                               O X



In such cases the position–move pairs are different but produce the same “afterposition,”
and thus must have the same value. A conventional action-value function would have to
separately assess both pairs, whereas an afterstate value function would immediately assess
both equally. Any learning about the position–move pair on the left would immediately
transfer to the pair on the right.
   Afterstates arise in many tasks, not just games. For example, in queuing tasks there
are actions such as assigning customers to servers, rejecting customers, or discarding
information. In such cases the actions are in fact defined in terms of their immediate
effects, which are completely known.
   It is impossible to describe all the possible kinds of specialized problems and corre-
sponding specialized learning algorithms. However, the principles developed in this book
should apply widely. For example, afterstate methods are still aptly described in terms
of generalized policy iteration, with a policy and (afterstate) value function interacting in
essentially the same way. In many cases one will still face the choice between on-policy
and off-policy methods for managing the need for persistent exploration.

Exercise 6.14 Describe how the task of Jack’s Car Rental (Example 4.2) could be
reformulated in terms of afterstates. Why, in terms of this specific task, would such a
reformulation be likely to speed convergence?                                        ⇤
138                                               Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


6.9     Summary
In this chapter we introduced a new kind of learning method, temporal-difference (TD)
learning, and showed how it can be applied to the reinforcement learning problem. As
usual, we divided the overall problem into a prediction problem and a control problem.
TD methods are alternatives to Monte Carlo methods for solving the prediction problem.
In both cases, the extension to the control problem is via the idea of generalized policy
iteration (GPI) that we abstracted from dynamic programming. This is the idea that
approximate policy and value functions should interact in such a way that they both
move toward their optimal values.
   One of the two processes making up GPI drives the value function to accurately predict
returns for the current policy; this is the prediction problem. The other process drives
the policy to improve locally (e.g., to be ⇡-greedy) with respect to the current value
function. When the first process is based on experience, a complication arises concerning
maintaining su↵cient exploration. We can classify TD control methods according to
whether they deal with this complication by using an on-policy or off-policy approach.
Sarsa is an on-policy method, and Q-learning is an off-policy method. Expected Sarsa
is also an off-policy method as we present it here. There is a third way in which TD
methods can be extended to control which we did not include in this chapter, called
actor–critic methods. These methods are covered in full in Chapter 13.
   The methods presented in this chapter are today the most widely used reinforcement
learning methods. This is probably due to their great simplicity: they can be applied
online, with a minimal amount of computation, to experience generated from interaction
with an environment; they can be expressed nearly completely by single equations that
can be implemented with small computer programs. In the next few chapters we extend
these algorithms, making them slightly more complicated and significantly more powerful.
All the new algorithms will retain the essence of those introduced here: they will be able
to process experience online, with relatively little computation, and they will be driven
by TD errors. The special cases of TD methods introduced in the present chapter should
rightly be called one-step, tabular, model-free TD methods. In the next two chapters we
extend them to n-step forms (a link to Monte Carlo methods) and forms that include
a model of the environment (a link to planning and dynamic programming). Then, in
the second part of the book we extend them to various forms of function approximation
rather than tables (a link to deep learning and artificial neural networks).
   Finally, in this chapter we have discussed TD methods entirely within the context of
reinforcement learning problems, but TD methods are actually more general than this.
They are general methods for learning to make long-term predictions about dynamical
systems. For example, TD methods may be relevant to predicting financial data, life
spans, election outcomes, weather patterns, animal behavior, demands on power stations,
or customer purchases. It was only when TD methods were analyzed as pure prediction
methods, independent of their use in reinforcement learning, that their theoretical
properties first came to be well understood. Even so, these other potential applications
of TD learning methods have not yet been extensively explored.
Bibliographical and Historical Remarks                                                    139


Bibliographical and Historical Remarks
As we outlined in Chapter 1, the idea of TD learning has its early roots in animal learning
psychology and artificial intelligence, most notably the work of Samuel (1959) and Klopf
(1972). Samuel’s work is described as a case study in Section 16.2. Also related to TD
learning are Holland’s (1975, 1976) early ideas about consistency among value predictions.
These influenced one of the authors (Barto), who was a graduate student from 1970 to
1975 at the University of Michigan, where Holland was teaching. Holland’s ideas led to
a number of TD-related systems, including the work of Booker (1982) and the bucket
brigade of Holland (1986), which is related to Sarsa as discussed below.

6.1–2 Most of the specific material from these sections is from Sutton (1988), includ-
      ing the TD(0) algorithm, the random walk example, and the term “temporal-
      difference learning.” The characterization of the relationship to dynamic pro-
      gramming and Monte Carlo methods was influenced by Watkins (1989), Werbos
      (1987), and others. The use of backup diagrams was new to the first edition of
      this book.
        Tabular TD(0) was proved to converge in the mean by Sutton (1988) and with
        probability 1 by Dayan (1992), based on the work of Watkins and Dayan (1992).
        These results were extended and strengthened by Jaakkola, Jordan, and Singh
        (1994) and Tsitsiklis (1994) by using extensions of the powerful existing theory
        of stochastic approximation. Other extensions and generalizations are covered in
        later chapters.

6.3     The optimality of the TD algorithm under batch training was established by
        Sutton (1988). Illuminating this result is Barnard’s (1993) derivation of the TD
        algorithm as a combination of one step of an incremental method for learning a
        model of the Markov chain and one step of a method for computing predictions
        from the model. The term certainty equivalence is from the adaptive control
        literature (e.g., Goodwin and Sin, 1984).

6.4     The Sarsa algorithm was introduced by Rummery and Niranjan (1994). They
        explored it in conjunction with artificial neural networks and called it “Modified
        Connectionist Q-learning”. The name “Sarsa” was introduced by Sutton (1996).
        The convergence of one-step tabular Sarsa (the form treated in this chapter) has
        been proved by Singh, Jaakkola, Littman, and Szepesvári (2000). The “windy
        gridworld” example was suggested by Tom Kalt.
        Holland’s (1986) bucket brigade idea evolved into an algorithm closely related to
        Sarsa. The original idea of the bucket brigade involved chains of rules triggering
        each other; it focused on passing credit back from the current rule to the rules
        that triggered it. Over time, the bucket brigade came to be more like TD learning
        in passing credit back to any temporally preceding rule, not just to the ones
        that triggered the current rule. The modern form of the bucket brigade, when
        simplified in various natural ways, is nearly identical to one-step Sarsa, as detailed
        by Wilson (1994).
140                                              Chapter 6: Temporal-Difference Learning


6.5   Q-learning was introduced by Watkins (1989), whose outline of a convergence
      proof was made rigorous by Watkins and Dayan (1992). More general convergence
      results were proved by Jaakkola, Jordan, and Singh (1994) and Tsitsiklis (1994).

6.6   The Expected Sarsa algorithm was introduced by George John (1994), who
      called it “Q-learning” and stressed its advantages over Q-learning as an off-policy
      algorithm. John’s work was not known to us when we presented Expected
      Sarsa in the first edition of this book as an exercise, or to van Seijen, van
      Hasselt, Whiteson, and Weiring (2009) when they established Expected Sarsa’s
      convergence properties and conditions under which it will outperform regular
      Sarsa and Q-learning. Our Figure 6.3 is adapted from their results. Van Seijen
      et al. defined “Expected Sarsa” to be an on-policy method exclusively (as we
      did in the first edition), whereas now we use this name for the general algorithm
      in which the target and behavior policies may differ. The general off-policy
      view of Expected Sarsa was noted by van Hasselt (2011), who called it “General
      Q-learning.”

6.7   Maximization bias and double learning were introduced and extensively investi-
      gated by van Hasselt (2010, 2011). The example MDP in Figure 6.5 was adapted
      from that in his Figure 4.1 (van Hasselt, 2011).

6.8   The notion of an afterstate is the same as that of a “post-decision state” (Van
      Roy, Bertsekas, Lee, and Tsitsiklis, 1997; Powell, 2011).
